We're getting ready to move on
from the topic of functions.
But before we do, let's just make sure
that you're familiar with these
very useful functions that you will see
throughout your mathematical study.
So I want to talk to you first
about the floor and ceiling functions.
Again, I am quite certain
you've probably seen this before, but
if not, they're pretty straightforward.
The floor function
essentially tells us to round down
to the largest integer
less than or equal to x.
And it's easy to remember
this is the floor function because
our brackets essentially have a floor.
And the ceiling function is similar
but asks us to round up
to the nearest integer greater
than or equal to x.
So let's take a look at an example.
I've got 2.2, and if I'm thinking
about 2.2 on a number line,
then I'm thinking about
2, and then 3, and 2.2
is right around somewhere in there.
And if I'm rounding or
if I'm using the ceiling function,
the ceiling function says
round up to the next integer
and the floor function says round
down to the next integer.
Same thing happens for my -3.7.
But just be careful how
you put these numbers on the number line.
Remember, 0 is over here somewhere.
This would be -3,
this would be -4, and -3.7 somewhere in here.
And then if I'm rounding up
for my ceiling function,
I end up at -3.
If I'm rounding down to my floor function,
I end up at -4.
So just be very careful
with your negatives.
And I am certain,
absolutely certain that you have
had the factorial function before.
Factorial function
is essentially denoted by f(n) = n!
That's the exclamation point,
which means factorial.
And it is the product of the first
n positive integers
when n is a non-negative integer.
So I give you an f(n) here
but let's say f(4).
I would take
4 times 3 times 2 times 1.
That would be my factorial function.
So again,
symbolically, it's n, n - 1,
n - 2, all the way down
until you get to 1.
Stirling's formula is fantastic.
We're not going to use it a ton right now,
but this is a way
because that factorial function
gets very large very quickly.
This is an approximation that we can find
of the product of the numbers
of n!.
Here's just one more
example for you to try.
Our function is the floor function
of x squared divided by two and we're
trying to find f(S) for the set of S,
which includes 0, 1, 2, and 3.
So if you'd like, go ahead and press pause
and try it yourself
before I go through the answer.
Otherwise, we're going to get started.
So if I'm finding f(0),
that tells me 0 squared
divided by 2 and the floor
function of that 0 squared is 0
divided by 2 is 0.
And the floor of 0 would
of course be 0.
If I'm looking at f(1),
f(1) would be 1
squared over 2 and the floor function
1 squared is 1.
1 divided by 2,
that just gives me one half.
So what is the floor function of one half?
That is also 0.
Let's do f(2).
f(2) is the floor function
of 2 squared
over 2.
Oops, floor function
of 2 squared over 2.
Which is...
2 squared is 4, divided by 2
And the floor function of 2
of course gives me 2.
And my last one, f(3)
tells me the floor of 3
squared over 2,
which is the floor of 9 over 2.
And the floor of 9 over 2,
which is basically
4.5 is 4.
So these would
be my solutions: 0, 0, 2, 4.
Up next,
we are going to switch gears
and talk a little bit about sequences.
So it's an introduction to sequences.